---
layout: post
title: "Reflection on 2021"
image:
    src: "assets/posts/2021.jpg"
    alt: "Kid trying to setup a goal post for an upcoming football game"
---

> Dimanakah bahagia
> Taman indah abadi
> Intan cantik juwita
> Kau tetap jaya sakti
> [Krontjong Ensemble Pantja Warna - Mutiara, 1968](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VmSUSxW7K3A)

This year, was hectic. I've unlearned a lot, learned a lot, and relearned a lot. For the time is limited (I started writing this at 23:10 after I just finished an exam), I will express my ideas in _via negativa_.

- Do not trust market orders; an interface between the user and the banal logic of exchanges must exist to protect the user from the exchange's petty deeds.
- Do not be a reactionist; pieces need not be dense between themselves if they are about different things, different things require different paces of understanding.
- Do not be too close; lack of borders does not necessarily imply the inability to be far away. A shepherd loves his sheep, a fisherman loves the sea, this conception of love is incompatible with the borderless concept that capitalists use to extract profit in an extreme manner, just because.

To falsify oneself is a small step to being a decent part of the world. Sorting out what I want to know, what I must know, and what I must not know; what I hope to be done in 2022.

I went to many places in 2021: Deli Serdang, Medan, Siborongborong, Sipoholon, Tarutung, Kintamani, Jimbaran, Bali, Kuta, Badung. I wish I had written my experiences at those places at that time, rather than just keeping it as a thought.

I want to make more meaningful connections to people, animals, trees in 2022. Living things must be valued for they live every day, that's hard enough.